What is machine learning?


Machine learning is a branch of artificial intelligence (AI) and computer science which focuses on the use of data and algorithms to imitate the way that humans learn, gradually improving its accuracy.


Machine learning (ML) is a type of artificial intelligence (AI) that allows software applications to become more accurate at predicting outcomes without being explicitly programmed to do so. Machine learning algorithms use historical data as input to predict new output values.



Is an umbrella term for solving problems for which development of algorithms by human programmers would be cost-prohibitive, and instead the problems are solved by helping machines 'discover' their 'own' algorithms,[1] without needing to be explicitly told what to do by any human-developed algorithms.



Machine learning methods:

Supervised machine learning            

Supervised learning, also known as supervised machine learning, is defined by its use of labeled datasets to train algorithms to classify data or predict outcomes accurately. As input data is fed into the model, the model adjusts its weights until it has been fitted appropriately. This occurs as part of the cross validation process to ensure that the model avoids overfitting or underfitting. Supervised learning helps organizations solve a variety of real-world problems at scale, such as classifying spam in a separate folder from your inbox. Some methods used in supervised learning include neural networks, naïve bayes, linear regression, logistic regression, random forest, and support vector machine (SVM).




In this type of machine learning, data scientists supply algorithms with labeled training data and define the variables they want the algorithm to assess for correlations. Both the input and the output of the algorithm is specified.




Supervised learning algorithms build a mathematical model of a set of data that contains both the inputs and the desired outputs.[38] The data is known as training data, and consists of a set of training examples. Each training example has one or more inputs and the desired output, also known as a supervisory signal. In the mathematical model, each training example is represented by an array or vector, sometimes called a feature vector, and the training data is represented by a matrix. Through iterative optimization of an objective function, supervised learning algorithms learn a function that can be used to predict the output associated with new inputs.[39] An optimal function will allow the algorithm to correctly determine the output for inputs that were not a part of the training data. An algorithm that improves the accuracy of its outputs or predictions over time is said to have learned to perform that task.[18]

Types of supervised-learning algorithms include active learning, classification and regression.[40] Classification algorithms are used when the outputs are restricted to a limited set of values, and regression algorithms are used when the outputs may have any numerical value within a range. As an example, for a classification algorithm that filters emails, the input would be an incoming email, and the output would be the name of the folder in which to file the email.

Similarity learning is an area of supervised machine learning closely related to regression and classification, but the goal is to learn from examples using a similarity function that measures how similar or related two objects are. It has applications in ranking, recommendation systems, visual identity tracking, face verification, and speaker verification.



Unsupervised machine learning


Unsupervised learning, also known as unsupervised machine learning, uses machine learning algorithms to analyze and cluster unlabeled datasets. These algorithms discover hidden patterns or data groupings without the need for human intervention. This method’s ability to discover similarities and differences in information make it ideal for exploratory data analysis, cross-selling strategies, customer segmentation, and image and pattern recognition. It’s also used to reduce the number of features in a model through the process of dimensionality reduction. Principal component analysis (PCA) and singular value decomposition (SVD) are two common approaches for this. Other algorithms used in unsupervised learning include neural networks, k-means clustering, and probabilistic clustering methods.



This type of machine learning involves algorithms that train on unlabeled data. The algorithm scans through data sets looking for any meaningful connection. The data that algorithms train on as well as the predictions or recommendations they output are predetermined.



Unsupervised learning algorithms take a set of data that contains only inputs, and find structure in the data, like grouping or clustering of data points. The algorithms, therefore, learn from test data that has not been labeled, classified or categorized. Instead of responding to feedback, unsupervised learning algorithms identify commonalities in the data and react based on the presence or absence of such commonalities in each new piece of data. A central application of unsupervised learning is in the field of density estimation in statistics, such as finding the probability density function.[41] Though unsupervised learning encompasses other domains involving summarizing and explaining data features. Unsupervised learning algorithms streamlined the process of survey and graph large indel based haplotypes of a gene of interest from pan-genome.[42]






Semi-supervised learning 

Semi-supervised learning offers a happy medium between supervised and unsupervised learning. During training, it uses a smaller labeled data set to guide classification and feature extraction from a larger, unlabeled data set. Semi-supervised learning can solve the problem of not having enough labeled data for a supervised learning algorithm. It also helps if it’s too costly to label enough data. 



This approach to machine learning involves a mix of the two preceding types. Data scientists may feed an algorithm mostly labeled training data, but the model is free to explore the data on its own and develop its own understanding of the data set.



Semi-supervised learning falls between unsupervised learning (without any labeled training data) and supervised learning (with completely labeled training data). Some of the training examples are missing training labels, yet many machine-learning researchers have found that unlabeled data, when used in conjunction with a small amount of labeled data, can produce a considerable improvement in learning accuracy.

In weakly supervised learning, the training labels are noisy, limited, or imprecise; however, these labels are often cheaper to obtain, resulting in larger effective training sets.[43]



Reinforcement machine learning


Reinforcement machine learning is a machine learning model that is similar to supervised learning, but the algorithm isn’t trained using sample data. This model learns as it goes by using trial and error. A sequence of successful outcomes will be reinforced to develop the best recommendation or policy for a given problem.

The IBM Watson® system that won the Jeopardy! challenge in 2011 is a good example. The system used reinforcement learning to learn when to attempt an answer (or question, as it were), which square to select on the board, and how much to wager—especially on daily doubles.



Data scientists typically use reinforcement learning to teach a machine to complete a multi-step process for which there are clearly defined rules. Data scientists program an algorithm to complete a task and give it positive or negative cues as it works out how to complete a task. But for the most part, the algorithm decides on its own what steps to take along the way.


Reinforcement learning is an area of machine learning concerned with how software agents ought to take actions in an environment so as to maximize some notion of cumulative reward. Due to its generality, the field is studied in many other disciplines, such as game theory, control theory, operations research, information theory, simulation-based optimization, multi-agent systems, swarm intelligence, statistics and genetic algorithms. In reinforcement learning, the environment is typically represented as a Markov decision process (MDP). Many reinforcements learning algorithms use dynamic programming techniques.[44] Reinforcement learning algorithms do not assume knowledge of an exact mathematical model of the MDP and are used when exact models are infeasible. Reinforcement learning algorithms are used in autonomous vehicles or in learning to play a game against a human opponent.



How does supervised machine learning work?


Supervised machine learning requires the data scientist to train the algorithm with both labeled inputs and desired outputs. Supervised learning algorithms are good for the following tasks:

Binary classification: Dividing data into two categories.
Multi-class classification: Choosing between more than two types of answers.
Regression modeling: Predicting continuous values.
Ensembling: Combining the predictions of multiple machine learning models to produce an accurate prediction.



Supervised learning uses a training set to teach models to yield the desired output. This training dataset includes inputs and correct outputs, which allow the model to learn over time. The algorithm measures its accuracy through the loss function, adjusting until the error has been sufficiently minimized.

Supervised learning can be separated into two types of problems when data mining—classification and regression:

Classification uses an algorithm to accurately assign test data into specific categories. It recognizes specific entities within the dataset and attempts to draw some conclusions on how those entities should be labeled or defined. Common classification algorithms are linear classifiers, support vector machines (SVM), decision trees, k-nearest neighbor, and random forest, which are described in more detail below.
Regression is used to understand the relationship between dependent and independent variables. It is commonly used to make projections, such as for sales revenue for a given business. Linear regression, logistical regression, and polynomial regression are popular regression algorithms.



To solve a given problem of supervised learning, one has to perform the following steps:

Determine the type of training examples. Before doing anything else, the user should decide what kind of data is to be used as a training set. In the case of handwriting analysis, for example, this might be a single handwritten character, an entire handwritten word, an entire sentence of handwriting or perhaps a full paragraph of handwriting.
Gather a training set. The training set needs to be representative of the real-world use of the function. Thus, a set of input objects is gathered and corresponding outputs are also gathered, either from human experts or from measurements.
Determine the input feature representation of the learned function. The accuracy of the learned function depends strongly on how the input object is represented. Typically, the input object is transformed into a feature vector, which contains a number of features that are descriptive of the object. The number of features should not be too large, because of the curse of dimensionality; but should contain enough information to accurately predict the output.
Determine the structure of the learned function and corresponding learning algorithm. For example, the engineer may choose to use support-vector machines or decision trees.
Complete the design. Run the learning algorithm on the gathered training set. Some supervised learning algorithms require the user to determine certain control parameters. These parameters may be adjusted by optimizing performance on a subset (called a validation set) of the training set, or via cross-validation.
Evaluate the accuracy of the learned function. After parameter adjustment and learning, the performance of the resulting function should be measured on a test set that is separate from the training set.




How does unsupervised machine learning work?


Unsupervised machine learning algorithms do not require data to be labeled. They sift through unlabeled data to look for patterns that can be used to group data points into subsets. Most types of deep learning, including neural networks, are unsupervised algorithms. Unsupervised learning algorithms are good for the following tasks:

Clustering: Splitting the dataset into groups based on similarity.
Anomaly detection: Identifying unusual data points in a data set.
Association mining: Identifying sets of items in a data set that frequently occur together.
Dimensionality reduction: Reducing the number of variables in a data set.



Unsupervised learning models are utilized for three main tasks—clustering, association, and dimensionality reduction. Below we’ll define each learning method and highlight common algorithms and approaches to conduct them effectively.

Clustering
Clustering is a data mining technique which groups unlabeled data based on their similarities or differences. Clustering algorithms are used to process raw, unclassified data objects into groups represented by structures or patterns in the information. Clustering algorithms can be categorized into a few types, specifically exclusive, overlapping, hierarchical, and probabilistic.

Exclusive and Overlapping Clustering
Exclusive clustering is a form of grouping that stipulates a data point can exist only in one cluster. This can also be referred to as “hard” clustering. The K-means clustering algorithm is an example of exclusive clustering.

K-means clustering is a common example of an exclusive clustering method where data points are assigned into K groups, where K represents the number of clusters based on the distance from each group’s centroid. The data points closest to a given centroid will be clustered under the same category. A larger K value will be indicative of smaller groupings with more granularity whereas a smaller K value will have larger groupings and less granularity. K-means clustering is commonly used in market segmentation, document clustering, image segmentation, and image compression.
Overlapping clusters differs from exclusive clustering in that it allows data points to belong to multiple clusters with separate degrees of membership. “Soft” or fuzzy k-means clustering is an example of overlapping clustering.

Hierarchical clustering
Hierarchical clustering, also known as hierarchical cluster analysis (HCA), is an unsupervised clustering algorithm that can be categorized in two ways; they can be agglomerative or divisive. Agglomerative clustering is considered a “bottoms-up approach.” Its data points are isolated as separate groupings initially, and then they are merged together iteratively on the basis of similarity until one cluster has been achieved. Four different methods are commonly used to measure similarity:

Ward’s linkage: This method states that the distance between two clusters is defined by the increase in the sum of squared after the clusters are merged.
Average linkage: This method is defined by the mean distance between two points in each cluster
Complete (or maximum) linkage: This method is defined by the maximum distance between two points in each cluster
Single (or minimum) linkage: This method is defined by the minimum distance between two points in each cluster
Euclidean distance is the most common metric used to calculate these distances; however, other metrics, such as Manhattan distance, are also cited in clustering literature.

Divisive clustering can be defined as the opposite of agglomerative clustering; instead it takes a “top-down” approach. In this case, a single data cluster is divided based on the differences between data points. Divisive clustering is not commonly used, but it is still worth noting in the context of hierarchical clustering. These clustering processes are usually visualized using a dendrogram, a tree-like diagram that documents the merging or splitting of data points at each iteration.

Probabilistic clustering
A probabilistic model is an unsupervised technique that helps us solve density estimation or “soft” clustering problems. In probabilistic clustering, data points are clustered based on the likelihood that they belong to a particular distribution. The Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) is the one of the most commonly used probabilistic clustering methods.

Gaussian Mixture Models are classified as mixture models, which means that they are made up of an unspecified number of probability distribution functions. GMMs are primarily leveraged to determine which Gaussian, or normal, probability distribution a given data point belongs to. If the mean or variance are known, then we can determine which distribution a given data point belongs to. However, in GMMs, these variables are not known, so we assume that a latent, or hidden, variable exists to cluster data points appropriately. While it is not required to use the Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm, it is a commonly used to estimate the assignment probabilities for a given data point to a particular data cluster.   
Association Rules
An association rule is a rule-based method for finding relationships between variables in a given dataset. These methods are frequently used for market basket analysis, allowing companies to better understand relationships between different products. Understanding consumption habits of customers enables businesses to develop better cross-selling strategies and recommendation engines. Examples of this can be seen in Amazon’s “Customers Who Bought This Item Also Bought” or Spotify’s "Discover Weekly" playlist. While there are a few different algorithms used to generate association rules, such as Apriori, Eclat, and FP-Growth, the Apriori algorithm is most widely used.

Apriori algorithms
Apriori algorithms have been popularized through market basket analyses, leading to different recommendation engines for music platforms and online retailers. They are used within transactional datasets to identify frequent itemsets, or collections of items, to identify the likelihood of consuming a product given the consumption of another product. For example, if I play Black Sabbath’s radio on Spotify, starting with their song “Orchid”, one of the other songs on this channel will likely be a Led Zeppelin song, such as “Over the Hills and Far Away.” This is based on my prior listening habits as well as the ones of others. Apriori algorithms use a hash tree to count itemsets, navigating through the dataset in a breadth-first manner.

Dimensionality reduction
While more data generally yields more accurate results, it can also impact the performance of machine learning algorithms (e.g. overfitting) and it can also make it difficult to visualize datasets. Dimensionality reduction is a technique used when the number of features, or dimensions, in a given dataset is too high. It reduces the number of data inputs to a manageable size while also preserving the integrity of the dataset as much as possible. It is commonly used in the preprocessing data stage, and there are a few different dimensionality reduction methods that can be used, such as:

Principal component analysis
Principal component analysis (PCA) is a type of dimensionality reduction algorithm which is used to reduce redundancies and to compress datasets through feature extraction. This method uses a linear transformation to create a new data representation, yielding a set of "principal components." The first principal component is the direction which maximizes the variance of the dataset. While the second principal component also finds the maximum variance in the data, it is completely uncorrelated to the first principal component, yielding a direction that is perpendicular, or orthogonal, to the first component. This process repeats based on the number of dimensions, where a next principal component is the direction orthogonal to the prior components with the most variance.

Singular value decomposition
Singular value decomposition (SVD) is another dimensionality reduction approach which factorizes a matrix, A, into three, low-rank matrices. SVD is denoted by the formula, A = USVT, where U and V are orthogonal matrices. S is a diagonal matrix, and S values are considered singular values of matrix A. Similar to PCA, it is commonly used to reduce noise and compress data, such as image files.

Autoencoders
Autoencoders leverage neural networks to compress data and then recreate a new representation of the original data’s input. Looking at the image below, you can see that the hidden layer specifically acts as a bottleneck to compress the input layer prior to reconstructing within the output layer. The stage from the input layer to the hidden layer is referred to as “encoding” while the stage from the hidden layer to the output layer is known as “decoding.”




Neural network tasks are often categorized as discriminative (recognition) or generative (imagination). Often but not always, discriminative tasks use supervised methods and generative tasks use unsupervised (see Venn diagram); however, the separation is very hazy. For example, object recognition favors supervised learning but unsupervised learning can also cluster objects into groups. Furthermore, as progress marches onward some tasks employ both methods, and some tasks swing from one to another. For example, image recognition started off as heavily supervised, but became hybrid by employing unsupervised pre-training, and then moved towards supervision again with the advent of dropout, ReLU, and adaptive
Training
During the learning phase, an unsupervised network tries to mimic the data it's given and uses the error in its mimicked output to correct itself (i.e. correct its weights and biases). Sometimes the error is expressed as a low probability that the erroneous output occurs, or it might be expressed as an unstable high energy state in the network.

In contrast to supervised methods' dominant use of backpropagation, unsupervised learning also employs other methods including: Hopfield learning rule, Boltzmann learning rule, Contrastive Divergence, Wake Sleep, Variational Inference, Maximum Likelihood, Maximum A Posteriori, Gibbs Sampling, and backpropagating reconstruction errors or hidden state reparameterizations. See the table below for more details.


How does semi-supervised learning work?

Semi-supervised learning works by data scientists feeding a small amount of labeled training data to an algorithm. From this, the algorithm learns the dimensions of the data set, which it can then apply to new, unlabeled data. The performance of algorithms typically improves when they train on labeled data sets. But labeling data can be time consuming and expensive. Semi-supervised learning strikes a middle ground between the performance of supervised learning and the efficiency of unsupervised learning. Some areas where semi-supervised learning is used include:

Machine translation: Teaching algorithms to translate language based on less than a full dictionary of words.
Fraud detection: Identifying cases of fraud when you only have a few positive examples.
Labelling data: Algorithms trained on small data sets can learn to apply data labels to larger sets automatically.


Choosing the right approach for your situation depends on how your data scientists assess the structure and volume of your data, as well as the use case. To make your decision, be sure to do the following:

Evaluate your input data: Is it labeled or unlabeled data? Do you have experts that can support additional labeling?
Define your goals: Do you have a recurring, well-defined problem to solve? Or will the algorithm need to predict new problems?
Review your options for algorithms: Are there algorithms with the same dimensionality you need (number of features, attributes or characteristics)? Can they support your data volume and structure?
Classifying big data can be a real challenge in supervised learning, but the results are highly accurate and trustworthy. In contrast, unsupervised learning can handle large volumes of data in real time. But, there’s a lack of transparency into how data is clustered and a higher risk of inaccurate results. This is where semi-supervised learning comes in.



The acquisition of labeled data for a learning problem often requires a skilled human agent (e.g. to transcribe an audio segment) or a physical experiment (e.g. determining the 3D structure of a protein or determining whether there is oil at a particular location). The cost associated with the labeling process thus may render large, fully labeled training sets infeasible, whereas acquisition of unlabeled data is relatively inexpensive. In such situations, semi-supervised learning can be of great practical value. Semi-supervised learning is also of theoretical interest in machine learning and as a model for human learning.



How does reinforcement learning work?


Reinforcement learning works by programming an algorithm with a distinct goal and a prescribed set of rules for accomplishing that goal. Data scientists also program the algorithm to seek positive rewards -- which it receives when it performs an action that is beneficial toward the ultimate goal -- and avoid punishments -- which it receives when it performs an action that gets it farther away from its ultimate goal. Reinforcement learning is often used in areas such as:

Robotics: Robots can learn to perform tasks the physical world using this technique.
Video gameplay: Reinforcement learning has been used to teach bots to play a number of video games.
Resource management: Given finite resources and a defined goal, reinforcement learning can help enterprises plan out how to allocate resources.



Due to its generality, reinforcement learning is studied in many disciplines, such as game theory, control theory, operations research, information theory, simulation-based optimization, multi-agent systems, swarm intelligence, and statistics. In the operations research and control literature, reinforcement learning is called approximate dynamic programming, or neuro-dynamic programming. The problems of interest in reinforcement learning have also been studied in the theory of optimal control, which is concerned mostly with the existence and characterization of optimal solutions, and algorithms for their exact computation, and less with learning or approximation, particularly in the absence of a mathematical model of the environment. In economics and game theory, reinforcement learning may be used to explain how equilibrium may arise under bounded rationality.




Q-learning
Now, let's look at a type of reinforcement learning called Q-learning, and then build a simple simulation to demonstrate it.

Consider an agent in a 2-dimensional world. The world is made up of cells that the agent can occupy (the states). In each state are actions that the agent can perform—namely, move in one of four directions to a new cell. When the agent moves, it can receive a reward (or a reward in the future that was received based on this initial move). Given this reward, it can assign a preference to the action for a state so that the state is preferred in the future (as the goal of the agent is to maximize its reward). The learning process is then identifying the optimal action for each state that provides the highest reward. Identifying the policies of actions for given states is the process of learning.

In Q-learning, each state-action pair is assigned a Q-value, which represents the sum of reinforcements that are calculated by a Q-value function. This work is performed as the agent explores the environment. When a particular action is performed in a given state, a reward is received, and it updates the Q-value for the state–action pair to remember this. As the agent wanders, the Q-values for state–action pairs are refined so that later (post-learning) the agent can apply the best action for a given state (given its Q-value). Note that during learning, the agent can probabilistically choose an action for a given state (as a function of each action's Q-value in relation to the sum of Q-values). This process allows the agent to prefer an action for a given state (to use its learned knowledge) but sometimes choose a less optimal action for exploration as seen below.





ref

https://www.ibm.com/topics/machine-learning


https://www.techtarget.com/searchenterpriseai/definition/machine-learning-ML


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machinelearning



